---
layout: post
title: "Pactus 0.15.1 released"
date: 2023-10-21 00:00:00 +0000
tags: announcement, release, testnet
---

## Overview

Pactus Blockchain [Version 0.15.1](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/releases/tag/v0.15.1)
is now available for download.
This release includes a graphical user interface (GUI) that
is suitable for both beginners and experienced users.
It also includes a command-line interface (CLI) for advanced users and wallet software
that allows users to interact with the blockchain without the need to sync the entire blockchain.

## Highlites

This version address an unforeseen issue in the consensus protocol.
We kindly ask all validators to upgrade their nodes to this version.

## Download

This version has been implemented for [Testnet-2]({{ site.url }}/2023/10/15/testnet-2-launched.html) and
is being prepared for the upcoming Mainnet launch.
To start using Pactus Blockchain Testnet-2, download the latest version from the
[download]({{ site.baseurl }}/download) page and join the Testnet.

- [How to run Pactus in graphic mode?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-gui)
- [How to run Pactus in command line mode?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-cli)
- [How to run Pactus using Docker?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-docker)

## How to Upgrade

If you are running an older version, shut it down.
Uninstall the previous version and install the newer version.
If you are using the archived version, simply use the new version.

## Change log

This version includes several changes and improvements, such as:

### Fix

- **consensus**: strong termination for the binary agreement ([#765](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/pull/765))
- **consensus**: not increase the voting power on duplicated binary votes ([#762](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/pull/762))

You can find the [full list of changes on Github](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/compare/v0.15.0...v0.15.1),
as well as the [source code](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/releases/tag/v0.15.1)
