---
layout: post
title: "Pactus 0.16.1 released"
date: 2023-11-04 00:00:00 +0000
tags: announcement, release, testnet
---

## Overview

Pactus Blockchain [Version 0.16.1](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/releases/tag/v0.16.1)
is now available for download.
This release includes a graphical user interface (GUI) that
is suitable for both beginners and experienced users.
It also includes a command-line interface (CLI) for advanced users and wallet software
that allows users to interact with the blockchain without the need to sync the entire blockchain.

## Highlites

In this version, the private IP address won't be advertised, and by default,
nodes try to find if they have any public IP address.
If so, they will advertise it. Users can also set the `public_address` in the config file.
This feature specifically helps users who have both public and private IP addresses to always advertise the public addresses.
Users can still use the private network if they enable the `force_private_network` option inside the config file.
Most users don't need to change their node's configuration.

## Download

This version has been implemented for [Testnet-2]({{ site.url }}/2023/10/15/testnet-2-launched.html) and
is being prepared for the upcoming Mainnet launch.
To start using Pactus Blockchain Testnet-2, download the latest version from the
[download]({{ site.baseurl }}/download) page and join the Testnet.

These guides can help you to download, install and configure your node:

- [How to run Pactus in graphic mode?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-gui)
- [How to run Pactus in command line mode?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-cli)
- [How to run Pactus using Docker?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-docker)

## How to Upgrade

If you are running an older version, shut it down.
Uninstall the previous version and install the newer version.
If you are using the archived version, simply use the new version.

## Change log

This version includes several changes and improvements, such as:

### Feat

- **network**: adding public address to factory ([#795](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/pull/795))
- **network**: filter private ips ([#793](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/pull/793))

### Fix

- **network**: not close connection for bootstrap nodes ([#792](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/pull/792))

You can find the [full list of changes on Github](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/compare/v0.16.0...v0.16.1),
as well as the [source code](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/releases/tag/v0.6.1)
