---
layout: post
title: "Pactus 1.0.0 (Beijing) Released"
date: 2024-01-31 00:00:00 +0000
tags: announcement, release
---

## Overview

Pactus Blockchain [Version 1.0.0 Beijing](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/releases/tag/v1.0.0)
is now available for download.
This release includes a graphical user interface (GUI) that
is suitable for both beginners and experienced users.
It also includes a command-line interface (CLI) for advanced users and wallet software
that allows users to interact with the blockchain without the need to sync the entire blockchain.

## Highlights

### Mainnet Official Release v1.0.0 Beijing

The much-anticipated official software release of Pactus v1.0.0 Beijing marks a significant milestone for our community. After conducting a poll, the name "Beijing" was unanimously selected by our contributors. This impressive mainnet release represents the culmination of extensive development efforts. Pactus v1.0.0 Beijing offers a pioneering solution for streamlining validation of Pactus blockchain, enhancing security, and providing a user-friendly experience. We're excited to unveil the official software and welcome users to experience the power of Pactus in revolutionizing the future of blockchain. Join us on this exciting journey. 

## Download

This version has been implemented for [Mainnet]({{ site.url }}/2024-01-24-mainnet-launched.html)  To start using Pactus Mainnet, download the latest version from the [download]({{ site.baseurl }}/download) page and join the Mainnet.

These guides can help you to download, install and configure your node:

    [How to run Pactus in graphic mode?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-gui)
    [How to run Pactus in command line mode?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-cli)
    [How to run Pactus using Docker?]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/run-pactus-docker)

## How to Upgrade

If you are running an older version, shut it down.
Uninstall the previous version and install the newer version.
If you are using the archived version, simply use the new version.

## Change log

This version includes several changes and improvements, such as:

### Feat
