---
layout: post
title: "Pactus 1.1.6 (Ottawa) Released"
date: 2024-05-31 00:00:00 +0000
tags: announcement, release
---

## Overview

Pactus Blockchain [Version 1.1.6 (Ottawa)](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/releases/tag/v1.1.6)
is now available for download.
This release includes the following applications:

- [Pactus GUI]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/pactus-gui/):
  The graphical user interface (GUI) for the Pactus node that is suitable
  for both beginners and experienced users.

- [Pactus Daemon]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/pactus-daemon/):
  The command-line interface (CLI) for the Pactus node that is suitable for experienced users.

- [Pactus Shell]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/pactus-shell/):
  The command-line tool that allows users to interact with a Pactus node.

- [Pactus Wallet]({{ site.baseurl }}/user-guides/pactus-wallet/):
  The wallet software that allows users to manage their wallet and send transactions
  without the need to sync the entire blockchain.

## Highlights

This version updates the consensus mechanism to move to new rounds once
a proper and justified "Decided" vote seen by a non-faulty validator.
This helps ensure that the consensus mechanism stays in sync with the network when the validator restarts.

To ensure network stability and security,
it is recommended that all validators upgrade to this version as soon as they can.

## Download

To start using Pactus blockchain, download the latest version from the [download]({{ site.baseurl }}/download)
page and join the Mainnet.

## How to Upgrade

If you are running an older version, close it first.
Then uninstall the previous version and install the newer version.
If you are using the archived version, simply replace it with the new version .

## Change log

This version includes several changes and improvements, such as:

### Fix

- **consensus**: move to new round on decided vote ([#1293](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/pull/1293))

You can find the [full list of changes on Github](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/compare/v1.1.5...v1.1.6),
as well as the [source code](https://github.com/pactus-project/pactus/releases/tag/v1.1.6)
